README.md, before:


# Classify Them All

Using machine learning to predict the types of Pokémon characters based on in-game statistics and image data. For an analysis of methodology, results, and more, read the paper, `reports/Classify Them All Report.pdf`. For a simplified explanation of the project, read the presentation, `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pdf`.

## License

(c) 2025 Scott Ratchford.

`Classify Them All` is licensed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE.txt` for details.

## Abstract

Pokémon are fictional creatures from a video game series of the same name. There are over 1,000 Pokémon species at the time of publication, and each species is labeled with exactly 1 or 2 “types” from a list of 18 types (see Appendix A).

Although the appearance of a Pokémon may provide some indication of its type, it is sometimes difficult for a human to identify the type(s) of a Pokémon species from appearance alone. Machine learning methods may provide deeper insight into the connections between the appearance of Pokémon, their in-game statistics, and their types.

We seek to answer three questions. How do Pokémon statistics relate to Pokémon types? How do Pokémon colors relate to Pokémon types? Can the combination of Pokémon statistics and colors be used to accurately predict Pokémon types?

We found that the in-game statistics of Pokémon have an insignificant correlation with Pokémon types. The colors of each Pokémon have significant correlations with Pokémon types. The combination of these two data sets provides improved prediction accuracy, but the color data is far more significant that other data.

## How to Use

### Read the Report

To read the paper, open the file `reports/Classify Them All Report.pdf` or `reports/Classify Them All Report.docx`. To read the presentation, open the file `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pdf` or `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pptx`.

### Read the Full Results

To read through the code and results behind the paper, open the files `html/preprocess_data.html`, `html/main.html`, and `html/create_visuals.html`. These files were generated by Jupyter from the source code.

### Run the Code

1. Install Python 3.13 or above.
2. Run the command `pip install pipenv`.
3. Run the command `pipenv shell` to automatically create a virtual environment with the required dependencies.
4. (Optional) To adjust the random seed used for train-test split, open `preprocess_data.ipynb` and edit the number in `random.seed(151)`.
5. (Optional) To adjust the random seed used for model training, open `main.ipynb` and edit the value of the variable `RNG_SEED`.
6. Open the file `preprocess_data.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells. This automatically splits the Pokémon into training and testing sets, processes the colors of each, and saves the files required for `main.ipynb` to function properly.
7. Open the file `main.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells.
8. Open the file `create_visuals.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells.

## Data Sources

### Data Sets

1. Pokémon Images - ["Pokemon with Stats and Images" by Christoffer MS, Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/christofferms/pokemon-with-stats-and-image)
2. Pokémon Statistics - ["Pokemon Pokedex" by Kumar Arnav, Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arnavvvvv/pokemon-pokedex)

### Data Set Adjustments

The original dataset contained two minor errors. Golisopod's type was changed from "bug" to "Bug". Snom's type was changed from "ice" to "Ice".

Some Pokémon have several variants and forms that share the same name. Due to complications in matching these variants and forms, many of these Pokémon were removed from the dataset before analysis. See `ignored_pokemon.csv` for the full list of Pokémon that were removed from the dataset.

## Generative AI Usage Disclosure

For this assignment's preparation, the author has utilized ChatGPT, a language model created by OpenAI. Within this assignment, ChatGPT was used to assist in the creation of image color extraction functions and writing code to visualize the color clusters.

Commit message:

updated path to color data

README.md, after:


# Classify Them All

Using machine learning to predict the types of Pokémon characters based on in-game statistics and image data. For an analysis of methodology, results, and more, read the paper, `reports/Classify Them All Report.pdf`. For a simplified explanation of the project, read the presentation, `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pdf`.

## License

(c) 2025 Scott Ratchford.

`Classify Them All` is licensed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE.txt` for details.

## Abstract

Pokémon are fictional creatures from a video game series of the same name. There are over 1,000 Pokémon species at the time of publication, and each species is labeled with exactly 1 or 2 “types” from a list of 18 types (see Appendix A).

Although the appearance of a Pokémon may provide some indication of its type, it is sometimes difficult for a human to identify the type(s) of a Pokémon species from appearance alone. Machine learning methods may provide deeper insight into the connections between the appearance of Pokémon, their in-game statistics, and their types.

We seek to answer three questions. How do Pokémon statistics relate to Pokémon types? How do Pokémon colors relate to Pokémon types? Can the combination of Pokémon statistics and colors be used to accurately predict Pokémon types?

We found that the in-game statistics of Pokémon have an insignificant correlation with Pokémon types. The colors of each Pokémon have significant correlations with Pokémon types. The combination of these two data sets provides improved prediction accuracy, but the color data is far more significant that other data.

## How to Use

### Read the Report

To read the paper, open the file `reports/Classify Them All Report.pdf` or `reports/Classify Them All Report.docx`. To read the presentation, open the file `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pdf` or `reports/Classify Them All Presentation.pptx`.

### Read the Full Results

To read through the code and results behind the paper, open the files `html/preprocess_data.html`, `html/main.html`, and `html/create_visuals.html`. These files were generated by Jupyter from the source code.

### Run the Code

1. Install Python 3.13 or above.
2. Run the command `pip install pipenv`.
3. Run the command `pipenv shell` to automatically create a virtual environment with the required dependencies.
4. (Optional) To adjust the random seed used for train-test split, open `preprocess_data.ipynb` and edit the number in `random.seed(151)`.
5. (Optional) To adjust the random seed used for model training, open `main.ipynb` and edit the value of the variable `RNG_SEED`.
6. Open the file `preprocess_data.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells. This automatically splits the Pokémon into training and testing sets, processes the colors of each, and saves the files required for `main.ipynb` to function properly.
7. Open the file `main.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells.
8. Open the file `create_visuals.ipynb`, connect to the virtual environment kernel, and run all cells.

## Data Sources

### Data Sets

All relevant data has been included in the `data` directory.

1. Pokémon Images - ["Pokemon with Stats and Images" by Christoffer MS, Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/christofferms/pokemon-with-stats-and-image)
2. Pokémon Statistics - ["Pokemon Pokedex" by Kumar Arnav, Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arnavvvvv/pokemon-pokedex)

### Data Set Adjustments

The original dataset contained two minor errors. Golisopod's type was changed from "bug" to "Bug". Snom's type was changed from "ice" to "Ice".

Some Pokémon have several variants and forms that share the same name. Due to complications in matching these variants and forms, many of these Pokémon were removed from the dataset before analysis. See `ignored_pokemon.csv` for the full list of Pokémon that were removed from the dataset.

## Generative AI Usage Disclosure

For this assignment's preparation, the author has utilized ChatGPT, a language model created by OpenAI. Within this assignment, ChatGPT was used to assist in the creation of image color extraction functions and writing code to visualize the color clusters.
